---
id: "0002"
date: "2023-02-04"
title: "CSS units: em's and rem's"
categories: 
    - "Front-End"
    - "CSS"
sources: ["https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=_-aDOAMmDHI&feature=youtu.be", "https://codepen.io/kevinpowell/pen/RKdjXe"]
---

## em's and rem's

Source [Kevin Powell: em's and rem's explained](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=_-aDOAMmDHI&feature=youtu.be)
Codepen [Kevin Powell - A look at some CSS units](https://codepen.io/kevinpowell/pen/RKdjXe)

## Core concept

When using `em`'s to set **font size**, it will be set **in relation to the parent element**.
When using `em`'s to set **spacing attributes (margin, padding)**, it will be set **in relation to the element's font size**.

## `em`

Font sizes set in `em`'s will set the font size **in relation to that element's parent**.
One `em` generally defaults to 16px. When a parent element doesn't have a font size, it will default to the `body`'s font size (16px).

`em` works by **compounding**, which means that font sizes will compound as they are used within children elements. 

For example, a grid parent element with a font-size of `2em` and a child element with font-size `2em`, the child element will display a font size of `4em` **because it will be 2 times the font-size of its parent element**.

## `rem`

Acording to the MDN docs, the whole reason `rem` exists is to fix this **compounding** problem. `rem` stands for **root** `em` which relates to the font size of the `html` element (or `::root`), not the `body`. This makes `rem`'s much more consistent.

## `em`s and `rem`s for spacing

When using them for `margin` or `padding`, what happens is that, while the font-size looks at **the parent**, the `margin` (or `padding` or any other property that's not the font-size) is looking at the **font-size** of its element.

```CSS
    h1 {
        font-size: 2.5em;
        /* 👆 margin in relation to font size, instead of parent  */
        margin-bottom: 1em;
    }
```

The `rem` however, is always consistent and only looks at the **root**.

### Pro-tip

Use `rem` for font-sizes to avoid compounding problems.

## When are `em`'s most useful?

One example are buttons. When setting padding/margin/etc on an element such as a button, we can easily adjust these properties just by changing the **font-size**.

```CSS
.btn {
    display: inline-block;
    padding: 1em 3em;
}
.btn--small {
    /* This 👇 will use the font-size to adjust the padding on .btn--small in relation to the padding  on .btn (0.5 of 1 and 3)*/
    font-size: 0.5em;
}
```

Doing things in `em`'s can often make your design more adaptable. However, when you want to keep things consistent (say keeping space on left and right equal), you should use `rem`.

## `em`'s and media queries

By adjusting the font-size, we can make our design much more adaptable to different screen sizes.

```CSS
html {
    font-size: 16px;
}

@media (min-width: 700px) {
    html {
        font-size: 25px;
    }
}
```
